.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2003 Andrey Simonenko
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" @(#)$Id: ipa.5,v 1.6.2.3 2003/04/17 20:47:42 simon Exp $
.\"
.TH IPA 5 "April 17, 2003"
.SH NAME
ipa \- ipa(8) database implementation
.SH DESCRIPTION
The implementation of the \fBipa\fP(8) database and its format are here for developers,
who want to develop some software based on this database, for administrators,
who wants to fix something in the database.
.PP
All accounting database is stored in the directory \fB/var/ipa\fP by default
or in other directory specified in the \fBdb_dir\fP parameter in the configuration
file (read the \fBipa.conf\fP(5) manual page for more information).
.PP
Because main directory for accounting database can be different than default
one, let's use \fBIPADIR\fP, instead of using default directory name.
.PP
Directory \fBIPADIR\fP contains other directories named by accounting rules
names. If you removed some accounting <rule> from your configuration file and
you do not want to keep accounting information for this <rule> any more, you
can remove directory \fBIPADIR/<rule>\fP.
.PP
Each directory \fBIPADIR/<rule>\fP contains some files and directories.
If name of directory consists only of digits then this directory contains
files with accounting information for year. Number of year is equal to
"name" of the directory. Such directories contain only files, a name of each
file consists of two digits. These files contain accounting information per
month, numbers of months are equal to "names" of files. If you do not want to keep
accounting information for some years or some months you can remove appropriate
directories or files. \fINOTE\fP: do not remove directories for current year and
files for current month while \fBipa\fP(8) is run.
.PP
The \fBIPADIR/<rule>/info\fP file contains text information about <rule> and
is overwrited everytime when \fBipa\fP(8) starts or makes reconfiguration.
Information for this file is taken from the appropriate \fBinfo\fP parameter
from the configuration file.
.PP
\fINOTE\fP: if you removed some \fBinfo\fP parameter from the
configuration file you are not required to remove \fBinfo\fP file from
the database, \fBipa\fP(8) will do it itself. This is true for \fBinfo\fP
files for limits as well.
.PP
Each accounting record in the database is stored with two timestamps: the first
timestamp is equal to local time when a record was appended, the second timestamp is
equal to local time when this record was updated at last time. \fINOTE\fP: a
record is updated even if accounting information was not changed. An accounting
record has following format:
.PP
	DD/h1:m1:s1-h2:m2:s2 xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\\n
.PP
Where DD is a day when a record was appended, decimal number x..x is current value
of a byte counter and takes 20 characters. h1:m1:s1 is the first timestamp and
h2:m2:s2 is the second timestamp. Based on two timestamps of last record in each
file in the database \fBipa\fP(8) checks if the database is correct when it
starts. \fBipa\fP(8) also checks time and date when it works and if time and/or
date were/was changed and this caused to unsuccessive time and/or date then
\fBipa\fP(8) will just log a warning message and append a new record to the
database. There is not any way for \fBipa\fP(8) to fix such problems. UTC time
and/or local date can be changed by such programs as date(1), ntpdate(8). The
time zone (TZ) can change local time, i.e. can make unsuccessive time changes.
This is not an error for most of programs but for \fBipa\fP(8) this can cause
an error (read more about some problems with time and local date in sections
about \fBupdate_db_time\fP, \fBappend_db_time\fP and \fBworktime\fP parameters
in the \fBipa.conf\fP(5) manual page). If \fBipa\fP(8) detects some problems
with time or date, then you should manually fix them in the appropriate
database file. You can do it with any text editor: just remove wrong lines, or
rearrange wrong sequence of lines (remember that each line is ended by a new
line character). \fINOTE\fP: probably you do not want to just remove wrong
lines, because you will lose accounting information. \fINOTE\fP: the
\fBipastat\fP(8) program does not show accounting information if it founds some
error with dates by default, but there is the \fB-e\fP switch which allows to
skip date checking.
.PP
Special value 24:00:00 for the second timestamp means the end of a day.
.PP
Directory \fBIPADIR/<rule>/limits\fP contains directories named by limits
names for <rule>. If you removed some <limit> from <rule> from your
configuration file and you do not want to keep information about that limit,
then  you can remove directory \fBIPADIR/<rule>/limits/<limit>\fP. Such
directories contain one or two files.
.PP
File \fBIPADIR/<rule>/limits/<limit>/limit\fP contains accounting information
for <limit> from <rule>. \fBipa\fP(8) can find some error with dates
and you also will need to fix these errors in this file. \fINOTE\fP: in some of
cases with dates error and timestamp errors \fBipa\fP(8) can fix them itself,
but a warning message for the information purpose will be send to syslog(8).
Each line in this file is ended by a new line character. The first line has
following format:
.PP
	xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy\\n
.PP
Where decimal number x..x is the current value of the byte counter for the
limit, decimal number y..y is a value of the \fBbyte_limit\fP parameter for
the limit. Each field is 20 characters long.
.PP
All other lines have following format:
.PP
	X YYYY.DD.MM/hh.mm.ss\\n
.PP
YYYY.DD.MM/hh.mm.ss is date when some event happened. YYYY usually takes 4
characters but is not limited to be just 4 characters long. Valid values for X
are `\fBs\fP', `\fBz\fP', `\fBr\fP', `\fBe\fP', `\fBx\fP'. `\fBs\fP' stands
for "Start" and means date when counter for limit was started.
`\fBz\fP' stands for "Zero" and means date when counter for limit will
be zeroed. `\fBr\fP' stands for "Reached" and means date when limit was
reached. `\fBe\fP' stands for "Expired" and means date when reached limit
will be expired. `\fBx\fP' stands for "Execute" and means date when commands
from \fBexec\fP parameters were executed (from the \fBreach\fP or
\fBexpire\fP section).
.PP
The \fBIPADIR/<rule>/limits/<limit>/info\fP file contains text information
about <limit> and is overwrited everytime when \fBipa\fP(8) starts or makes
reconfiguration. Information about this file is taken from the appropriate
\fBinfo\fP parameter from the configuration file.
.PP
The owner of all directories and files in the database is the super-user.
The group of some directory and files in it is determined by the \fBdb_group\fP
parameter in the configuration file. "Other" users always are not allowed
to access any database directory or file (except the \fBlock\ db\fP file).
.PP
There is a special file \fBIPADIR/lock\ db\fP (the file name has one
whitespace character). If some program wants to access database files, it
can obtain shared (or read) lock on this file. This locking is optional
and should be use if \fBipa\fP(8) locks files in the database.
Read manual page \fBipa.conf\fP(5) for more information about advantages
and disadvantages of database locking feature and how \fBipa\fP(8) locks
files in the database (paragraphs about the \fBlock_db\fP parameter).
.SH FILES
/var/ipa/
.br
/usr/local/etc/ipa.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
ipa(8), ipa.conf(5), ipastat(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrey\ Simonenko\ <simon@comsys.ntu-kpi.kiev.ua>
.SH BUGS
If you find any, please send email me.
