.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2003 Andrey Simonenko
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" @(#)$Id: ipa.8,v 1.6.2.2 2003/02/20 06:26:57 simon Exp $
.\"
.TH IPA 8 "January 14, 2003"
.SH NAME
ipa \- utility for IP accounting
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBipa\fP\ [\fB-hVv\fP]
.br
\fBipa\fP\ [\fB-c\fP\ <directory>]\ [\fB-p\fP\ <pid-file>]\ \fB-k\fP\ <signal>
.br
\fBipa\fP\ [\fB-c\fP\ <directory>]\ \fB-t\fP\ [\fB-t\fP]\ [\fB-f\fP\ <config-file>]
.br
\fBipa\fP\ [\fB-d\fP]\ [\fB-c\fP\ <directory>]\ [\fB-f\fP\ <config-file>]
.br
\ \ \ \ [\fB-p\fP\ <pid-file>]\ [\fB-L\fP\ <log-facility>]
.br
\fBipa\fP [\fB-c\fP <directory>] [\fB-f\fP <config-file>]
.br
\ \ \ \ [\fB-r\fP\ <rule>\ [\fB-l\fP\ <limit>]]\ section\ [subsection]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBipa\fP allows to make IP accounting based on FreeBSD IPv4/v6 Firewall (IPFW)
rules, OpenBSD Packet Filter (PF) rules and IP Filter (IPF) accounting rules
on FreeBSD, NetBSD and OpenBSD, stores all accounting information in the database,
supports database locking, allows to set up limits for each accounting rule,
understands time intervals like "end of day", "end of week", etc. \fBipa\fP(8)
reads its configuration from the file \fB/usr/local/etc/ipa.conf\fP or from
other one given in the command line. Read manual page \fBipa.conf\fP(5) for
detail description of \fBipa\fP(8) features.
.PP
If \fBipa\fP(8) was compiled with the \fB-DIPFW2\fP on FreeBSD 4.x, then
it uses IPFW2.
.PP
Only the super-user can use all features of \fBipa\fP(8),
other users can use it only for testing configuration files,
viewing its version and help messages.
.PP
All accounting information made by \fBipa\fP(8) is stored in the directory
\fB/var/ipa\fP by default or in other directory specified in the \fBdb_dir\fP
parameter in the configuration file. There is a special program
\fBipastat\fP(8) for reading and outputing accounting statistics.
To allow some other users except the super-user to read
statistics set up appropriate \fBdb_group\fP parameters in the
configuration file(s) (read about this parameter in the \fBipa.conf\fP(5)
manual page). Read the \fBipa\fP(5) manual page for more
information about IP accounting database implementation.
.PP
\fBipa\fP(8) locks the file \fB/var/run/ipa.pid\fP to prevent multiple copies
of itself from running and stores its PID in this file.
.PP
Available options are:
.IP \fB-c\fP\ <directory>
Specifies the <directory> \fBipa\fP(8) should chroot(2) into immediately.
<directory> should be given with absolute path.
.IP \fB-d\fP
Do not run in the background, write all log messages to stderr, as well to
syslog. It is useful option for debugging a configuration file and testing
IPFW/IPF/PF accounting rules.
.IP \fB-f\fP\ <config-file>
Use given <config-file> instead of using default configuration file
\fB/usr/local/etc/ipa.conf\fP. \fINOTE\fP: a configuration file should be given
with absolute pathname (i.e. starts with the `/' character).
.IP \fB-h\fP
Print help message about available options and exit.
.IP \fB-k\fP\ <signal>
Send <signal> to running copy of \fBipa\fP(8). Valid arguments are:
\fBshutdown\fP (send signal TERM), \fBreconfigure\fP (send signal HUP),
\fBkill\fP (send signal KILL), \fBdump\fP (send signal USR1). PID of running
copy is taken from the file \fB/var/run/ipa.pid\fP or from other one given in
the \fB-p\fP option. \fINOTE\fP: do not use signal KILL to shutdown \fBipa\fP(8),
use this signal if only \fBipa\fP(8) does not work properly and does not catch
signal TERM (or signal INT if it is run in the foreground regime). \fBipa\fP(8)
will not send any signals, if its pid-file is not locked.
.IP \fB-L\fP\ <log-facility>
Use given syslog <log-facility> instead of using default facility "ipa".
.IP \fB-p\fP\ <pid-file>
Use given <pid-file> instead of using default file \fB/var/run/ipa.pid\fP to
store or read PID of the running copy. This option allows to start some copies
of \fBipa\fP(8) at once (probably for the testing purpose). If the \fB-p\fP
option is used with the \fB-k\fP option, then the \fB-p\fP option should be
specified first.
.IP \fB-r\fP\ <rule>\ [\fB-l\fP\ <limit>]
Specifies <rule> (and <limit>) from where following section (and subsection)
should be taken.
.IP \fB-t\fP
Parse the configuration file (default or specified in the \fB-f\fP option),
output its content and exit. This option allows to check if \fBipa\fP(8)
understands your configuration file. Also outputted configuration file is
indented and can be used as original. For example, run:

	$ ipa -t -f some-config-file > ipa.conf

to produce indented version of some-config-file.
.IP
If two \fB-tt\fP switches are used, then \fBipa\fP(8) includes all configuration
files from \fBinclude\fP section(s) and checks them as one configuration file.
In this case \fBipa\fP(8) also outputs all information about included and
not included files and directories in comments.
.IP \fB-V\fP
Show information about \fBipa\fP(8) and supported IP accounting systems.
.IP \fB-v\fP
Show version number and exit.
.IP section\ [subsection]
Run commands from the given section: "startup", "shutdown" (subsection can be
"if_limit_is_reached" or "if_limit_is_not_reached"), "reach" or "expire".
It is possible to use short forms of subsection names, read more about this on
the \fBipa.conf\fP(5) manual page.
.PP
\fBipa\fP(8) understands signals \fBTERM\fP, \fBHUP\fP and \fBUSR1\fP (also
\fBINT\fP if it is run in the foreground regime). Signal \fBTERM\fP (or \fBINT\fP)
causes to shutdown running copy of \fBipa\fP(8). This is only one correct way
to shutdown \fBipa\fP(8): it flushes counters and closes database files. Signal
\fBTERM\fP is sent automatically to all processes when whole BSD system is
going down and there is usually no necessary to write own script to shutdown
\fBipa\fP(8). \fINOTE\fP: \fBsyslogd\fP(8) usually is terminated first and
\fBipa\fP(8) cannot log last messages to syslog. If the \fB-d\fP switch is
specified then signal \fBINT\fP is handled as signal \fBTERM\fP (signal
\fBINT\fP usually is sent to a foreground process when you type Control-C
sequence).
.PP
Signal \fBUSR1\fP tells \fBipa\fP(8) to dump current values of counters to
the database, this allows to safe more accounting information before reloading
IPFW/IPF/PF accounting rules. Of course you have to wait some time (it depends
on your configuration file) to be sure that \fBipa\fP(8) stored all
accounting information to the database.
.PP
Signal \fBHUP\fP causes to reread configuration file (default or specified
in the command line when \fBipa\fP(8) was run). Running copy of \fBipa\fP(8)
begins to use new settings from the reread configuration file only if
\fBipa\fP(8) can parse the configuration file(s). If \fBipa\fP(8) cannot
parse the configuration file(s), then it continues to use old settings.
\fBipa\fP(8) also continues to use old settings if access permission bits
(mode) of the configuration file are incorrect. Not all settings from
the reread configuration file(s) are used,
read the \fBipa.conf\fP(5) manual page for more information.
.PP
\fBipa\fP(8) logs messages to the \fBsyslogd\fP(8). So, it is better before
first its start to add something likes this to the file \fBsyslog.conf\fP(5):
.PP
!ipa
.br
*.*<TAB>/var/log/ipa.log
.PP
then create log-file:
.PP
# touch /var/log/ipa.log
.PP
and restart \fBsyslogd\fP(8). If your system does not support such syntax of
\fBsyslog.conf\fP(5), you can specify valid for your system log-facility with
the \fB-L\fP option.
.PP
Log-messages sent by \fBipa\fP(8) have following levels: LOG_INFO (normal
messages), LOG_WARNING (some IPFW/IPF/PF rule does not exist, was removed,
was added, etc.) and LOG_ERR (something really serious). If \fBipa\fP(8)
sends the log-message with the level LOG_ERR, then it probably will exit.
.PP
\fBipa\fP(8) exits with a return code of 0 or with a return code not equal to
0 if something was wrong (usually it is wrong format of the configuration file).
\fINOTE\fP: by default \fBipa\fP(8) is run in the background and you should
not rely upon its return code (it is just a return code of a original process),
it is better to look at its log-file.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
\fBipa\fP(8) allows to make IP accounting based on FreeBSD IPv4/v6 Firewall,
OpenBSD Packet Filter or IP Filter accounting rules. So, if you haven't added
FreeBSD IPv4/v6 Firewall, OpenBSD Packet Filter or IP Filter support into your
kernel, you should do it, recompile kernel and restart your system. Also you
should set accounting rules somewhere. Read the \fBipa.conf\fP(5) manual page
for information where it is better to do it.
.PP
IPv4 Firewall first appeared in FreeBSD 2.0. IPv6 Firewall first appeared
in FreeBSD 4.0, but due to bugs in its code \fBipa\fP(8) (in default
installation) works with it after FreeBSD 4.2-RELEASE.
.PP
FreeBSD IPFW2 was introduced in Summer 2002.
.PP
Packet Filter first appeared in OpenBSD 3.0.
.PP
IP Filter supports FreeBSD, NetBSD and OpenBSD. IP Filter was removed
from OpenBSD distribution in OpenBSD 3.0.
.PP
If you installed a kernel with new IPFW/IPF/PF implementation, then you
should also rebuild \fBipa\fP(8), because it uses IPFW/IPF/PF kernel
structures (i.e. structures from some C-language header files)
and they can be changed from one version of the operating system to another
one, but see below.
.PP
You should not rebuild \fBipa\fP(8) if you made changes in the kernel and those
changes did not cause changes in IPFW/IPF/PF parts of the kernel.
.SH FILES
/var/run/ipa.pid
.br
/var/ipa/
.br
/usr/local/etc/ipa.conf
.br
${PREFIX}/etc/ipa.conf.default
.br
${PREFIX}/share/examples/ipa/
.PP
(by default ${PREFIX} is /usr/local)
.SH SEE ALSO
ipa(5), ipa.conf(5), ipastat(8), ipf(1), ipfw(8), ip6fw(8), pf(4), pf.conf(5),
pfctl(8), syslogd(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrey\ Simonenko\ <simon@comsys.ntu-kpi.kiev.ua>
.SH BUGS
If you find any, please send email me.
