.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Andrey Simonenko
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" @(#)$Id: ipastat.8,v 1.6.2.1 2003/02/19 22:04:34 simon Exp $
.\"
.TH IPASTAT 8 "August 29, 2002"
.SH NAME
ipastat \- viewer for IP accounting database made by ipa(8)
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBipastat\fP\ [\fB-hv\fP]
.br
\fBipastat\fP\ [\fB-abekLnqtx\fP]\ [\fB-AKMGT\fP]\ [\fB-d\fP\ <db-directory>]
.br
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ [\fB-p\fP\ <time-back>]\ [\fB-I\fP|\fBi\fP\ <time-interval>]
.br
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ [\fB-R\fP|\fBr\fP\ <rule>\ [\fB-l\fP\ <limit>]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBipastat\fP is a viewer for IP accounting database made by \fBipa\fP(8).
.PP
Everyone can run \fBipastat\fP(8), but to view statistics one should belong
to appropriate user group(s) (access to some rule in the database is determined
by the \fBdb_group\fP parameter in the configuration file).
.PP
Available options are:
.IP \fB-a\fP
Print names of all rules, which the user can view or print names of all limits
for the rule specified in the \fB-r\fP option.
.IP \fB-b\fP
Sort summary accounting information by byte counters, two switches \fB-bb\fP
give reverse order of sorting. This switch can be used with some
\fB-R\fP options.
.IP \fB-d\fP\ <db-directory>
Use given <db-directory> instead of using default database directory /var/ipa.
.IP \fB-e\fP
Do not check dates in accounting files. By default if \fBipastat\fP(8) finds any
error with dates in accounting files, then it does not show accounting
information and outputs an error message.
.IP \fB-h\fP
Print help message about available options and exit.
.IP \fB-I\fP|\fBi\fP\ <time-interval>
Specify <time-interval> for output accounting information. If the \fB-I\fP
option is used, then check second timestamps of accounting records in
the database. If the \fB-i\fP option is used, then do not check second
timestamps of accounting records in the database. Format for <time-interval>
see below. Read more about difference between these two options below.
.IP \fB-k\fP
Assume that 1K is equal to 1000 bytes and so on.
.IP \fB-L\fP
Use database locking feature.
.IP \fB-n\fP
Do not indent information and do not print tables when output results. Use this
option if you want to parse output of this program.
.IP \fB-p\fP\ <time-back>
"Go back" in time, then output statistics. This option can be used with the
\fB-i\fP or \fB-I\fP option.
.IP \fB-q\fP
Do not read and output any \fBinfo\fP files (this switch can help to
place too wide tables on the screen).
.IP \fB-R\fP\ <rule>
Output summary accounting information for specified <rule>, it is possible to
specify some \fB-R\fP options at once (-R <rule1> -R <rule2> ... -R <rulen>).
.IP \fB-r\fP\ <rule>\ [\fB-l\fP\ <limit>]
Output accounting information for specified <rule>, statistics is output per
day. Or output accounting information for specified <limit> for <rule>.
.IP \fB-t\fP
Output accounting information for the rule per timestamp. I.e. output
accounting information as it is stored in the database.
.IP \fB-v\fP
Show version number and exit.
.IP \fB-x\fP
Treat rule names as POSIX regular expressions \fBre_format\fP(7). If this
switch is used with the \fB-r\fP option, then the first matched rule is taken.
If this switch is used with \fB-R\fP options, then all rules matched any of
given regular expressions are taken.
.PP
Switches for byte counters conversion:
.IP \fB-A\fP
Convert values of byte counters to Tbytes, Gbytes, Mbytes, Kbytes
and bytes (convert as much as possible).
.IP \fB-K\fP|\fBM\fP|\fBG\fP|\fBT\fP
Convert values of byte counters to Kbytes, Mbytes (this is default),
Gbytes or Tbytes.
.PP
Accounting information is output only for <time-interval> specified with the
\fB-i\fP or \fB-I\fP option. If the \fB-i\fP or \fB-I\fP option is omitted, then
\fBipastat\fP(8) outputs accounting information for the current month. The base
format of <time-interval> is following:
.PP
	Y1.M1.D1/h1:m1:s1-Y2.M2.D2/h2:m2:s2
.PP
where Y1, Y2 - years, M1, M2 - months, D1, D2 - days, h1, h2 - hours, m1, m2 -
minutes and s1, s2 - seconds. <time-interval> consists of left and right parts.
Date in the right part should be greater or equal to date in the left part.
Each accounting record in the database is stored with two timestamps: first
timestamp is equal to time when a record was appended, second timestamp is
equal to time when a record was updated at last time. h1:m1:s1 determines first
timestamp and h2:m2:s2 determines second timestamp. Y1.M1.D1 and Y2.M2.D2
determine two dates. Accounting information is output if it is found for
days between first date Y1.M1.D1 and second date Y2.M2.D2 and if first
timestamp for found day is greater or equal to h1:m1:s1. \fBipastat\fP(8)
does not check second timestamp until you specified <time-interval> with the
\fB-I\fP option. Usually there is no sense to check second timestamp, because if
first timestamp fits to <time-interval>, then a record is considered to be
interesting for the user. But the \fB-I\fP option can change this.
.PP
But you are not required to specify whole format for <time-interval>. You can
miss almost all elements in <time-interval>. Let's look at some examples
(following values can be used in the left part, as well in the right part):
.PP
	2000
.br
	1999.11
.br
	5
.br
	12.8
.br
	.19
.PP
Number 2000 is "year 2000". It is an equivalent for 2000.01.01/00:00:00 for the
left part, i.e. beginning of the year and is an equivalent for
2000.12.31/24:00:00 for the right part, i.e. end of last second of year 2000.
String 1999.11 is "11th month of year 1999". Similarly it is an equivalent for
1999.11.01/00:00:00 for the left part and 1999.11.30/24:00:00 for the right
part. Number 5 means "5th month of current year". It is an equivalent for
????.05.01/00:00:00 for the left part and ????.05.31/24:00:00 for the right
part. String 12.8 is "8th day of 12th month of current year". It is an
equivalent for ????.12.08/00:00:00 for the left part and ????.12.08/24:00:00
for the right part. Last string .19 means "19th day of current month".
Equivalents for the left and right parts are similar as for the previous
example. \fINOTE\fP: the year should be specified as four or more digits long
number, months, days, hours, minutes and seconds should be specified as one or
two digits long numbers.
.PP
Additionally you can specify time followed after the `\fB/\fP' character. Also
you can omit date and specify only time, in this case time is considered as
time of current day. Let's look at some examples (following values can be used
in the left part, as well in the right part):
.PP
	/12
.br
	/10:31
.br
	/9:11:01
.PP
String /12 is "12 hours". It is an equivalent for 12:00:00 for the left part and
13:00:00 for the right part. String /10:31 is "10 hours and 31 minutes". It is
an equivalent for 10:31:00 for the left part and 10:32:00 for the right part.
String /9:11:01 is "9 hours, 11 minutes and 1 second". It is equal to 9:11:01 for
both parts.
.PP
In all cases if the left part of <time-interval> is not complete, then
\fBipastat\fP(8) takes first second of first minute of first hour, etc. If
the right part of <time-interval> is not complete, then \fBipastat\fP(8) takes
the end of last second of last minute of last hour, etc. You can see it from
the previous examples: string /12 in the right part of time-interval means
13:00:00 and does not mean 12:59:59, because \fBipastat\fP(8) takes the end of last
second and does not take the beginning of last second.
.PP
The right part of <time-interval> can be omitted. In this case \fBipastat\fP(8) will
consider the value of the right part equal to the value of the left part.
But this is correct, for example strings "2000" and "2000-2000" are the same and
mean all days in year 2000.
.PP
Here it is some examples of <time-interval>:
.PP
	1999-2000
.PP
It means all days from 1th January 1999 to the midnight of 31th December 2000.
.PP
	/10
.PP
It means all minutes from 10:00:00 to 11:00:00 of current day.
.PP
	.22/01-/20:10
.PP
It means all minutes (and days) from 1:00:00 of 22th day of current month to
20:11:00 of current day.
.PP
\fINOTE\fP: if you find out that second timestamp of some record is equal to
24:00:00, then you should consider it as the end of the day. Usually all
timestamps should be started at 00:00:00 and stopped at 24:00:00 for each day.
.PP
It is possible to use abbreviated month names in \fB-i\fP and \fB-I\fP
options. Case of the abbreviated month name is ignored. Following abbreviated
month names are available: Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct,
Nov and Dec.
.PP
With the \fB-p\fP option it is possible to make following queries to the
database: "statistics for previous month", "statistics from September to
November of previous year", "statistics for previous week". Read information
about <time-back>'s format in the Examples section of this manual page.
.PP
All results generated by \fBipastat\fP(8) are indented and printed in tables,
until the \fB-n\fP option is specified. If some error occurs, then
\fBipastat\fP(8) prints empty line (line with no characters) and then prints
an error/warning message, and then prints an empty line one more (an empty line
actually has one character `\\n'). If you are going to parse output of this
program, you should use the \fB-n\fP option, after this all output is very
simple: values in each line are separated by single white space and titles of
tables are not output at all.
.PP
\fINOTE\fP: the format of the output with the \fB-n\fP switch is a bit
different, than the format of the output without this switch. All changes of
the format were made for simplifying parsing of the output.
.PP
Normally there are two programs which can simultaneously access the database.
These programs are \fBipa\fP(8) and \fBipastat\fP(8). By default \fBipa\fP(8)
does not lock any file it modifies and \fBipastat\fP(8) does not lock
any file it accesses. \fBipastat\fP(8) will try to obtain lock on whole
database and needed files if it runs with the \fB-L\fP switch in its
command line. If it cannot obtain lock during 10 seconds, it outputs
warning message and reads nothing. Read manual page \fBipa.conf\fP(5)
for more information about advantages and disadvantages of database
locking feature (paragraphs about the \fBlock_db\fP parameter).
.PP
\fBipastat\fP(8) exits with a return code of 0 or with a return code not equal
to 0 if something was wrong.  Also \fBipastat\fP(8) returns error code if
you are not allowed to view statistics for some rule (or limit).
.SH EXAMPLES
Output statistics for the rule "rule" for the current month:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule
.PP
Output statistics for the rule "rule" from 21th of September to the end of
November:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule sep.21-nov
.PP
    or
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule 9.21-11
.PP
Output statistics for the rule "rule" for September 2001:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule 2001.sep
.PP
    or
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule 2001.9
.PP
Output summary statistics for rules "rule1" and "rule2" for 2000 and 2001 years,
convert byte counters to Gbytes:
.PP
    $ ipastat -R rule1 -R rule2 -i 2000-2001 -G
.PP
Output the same statistics, but sort output statistics by byte counters:
.PP
    $ ipastat -R rule1 -R rule2 -i 2000-2001 -G -b
.PP
Output statisctis for the rule "rule" for the previous month:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule -p 1m
.PP
Output statistics for the rule "rule" from September to November of previous
year:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule -p 1y -i sep-nov
.PP
Output statistics for the same period but for the year before previous year:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule -p 2y -i sep-nov
.PP
Output statistics for the rule "rule" for the previous week:
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule -p 1w
.PP
Output statistics for the rule "rule" for the previous day from 10:00 to 22:30
(of course your configuration file should have appropriate settings to allow
to get such statistics):
.PP
    $ ipastat -r rule -p 1d -i /10-/22:30
.PP
Output statistics for all rules for previous month:
.PP
    $ ipastat -x -R . -p 1m
.PP
Output statistics for all rules with prefix "10.", or which end with ".123"
for current month:
.PP
    $ ipastat -x -R ^10\\. -R \\.123$
.PP
Output statistics for one rule which ends with "abc":
.PP
    $ ipastat -x -r abc$
.SH FILES
/var/ipa/
.br
/usr/local/etc/ipa.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
ipa.conf(5), ipa(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Andrey\ Simonenko\ <simon@comsys.ntu-kpi.kiev.ua>
.SH BUGS
If you find any, please send email me.
